index.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: The Unix Shell
---
The Unix shell has been around longer than most of its users have been alive.
It has survived so long because it's a power tool
that allows people to do complex things with just a few keystrokes.
More importantly,
it helps them combine existing programs in new ways
and automate repetitive tasks
so that they don't have to type the same things over and over again.
Use of the shell is fundamental to using a wide range of other powerful tools 
and computing resources (including "high-performance computing" supercomputers).
These lessons will start you on a path towards using these resources effectively.

> ## Prerequisites {.prereq}
>
> This lesson guides you through the basics of file systems and the
> shell.  If you have stored files on a computer at all and recognize
> the word “file” and either “directory” or “folder” (two common words
> for the same thing), you're ready for this lesson.
>
> If you're already comfortable manipulating files and directories,
> searching for files with `grep` and `find`, and writing simple loops
> and scripts, you probably won't learn much from this lesson.

> ## Getting ready {.getready}
>
> You need to download some files to follow this lesson:
> 
> 1. Make a new folder in your Desktop called `shell-novice`.
> 2. Download [shell-novice-data.zip](./shell-novice-data.zip) and move the file to this folder.
> 3. If it's not unzipped yet, double-click on it to unzip it. You should end up with a new folder called `data`.
> 4. You can access this folder from the Unix shell with:
>
> ~~~ {.input}
> $ cd && cd Desktop/shell-novice/data
> ~~~

## Topics

1.  [Introducing the Shell](00-intro.html)
2.  [Files and Directories](01-filedir.html)
3.  [Creating Things](02-create.html)
4.  [Pipes and Filters](03-pipefilter.html)
5.  [Loops](04-loop.html)
6.  [Shell Scripts](05-script.html)
7.  [Finding Things](06-find.html)

## Other Resources

*   [Reference](reference.html)
*   [Discussion](discussion.html)
*   [Instructor's Guide](instructors.html)

Commit message:

added navigation "getready" box to index.html
- topic pages include several different types of colored boxes whose
meaning is not immediately obvious to a new learner.
- topic pages are explicitly linked to from index.html, but the reverse
links from topic pages to index.html are not immediately obvious to a
new learner.
- this pull request adds a "Navigating this lesson" getready box to
index.html that alerts the new learner to the meaning of the colored
boxes and how to more easily navigate the lesson.

index.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: The Unix Shell
---
The Unix shell has been around longer than most of its users have been alive.
It has survived so long because it's a power tool
that allows people to do complex things with just a few keystrokes.
More importantly,
it helps them combine existing programs in new ways
and automate repetitive tasks
so that they don't have to type the same things over and over again.
Use of the shell is fundamental to using a wide range of other powerful tools 
and computing resources (including "high-performance computing" supercomputers).
These lessons will start you on a path towards using these resources effectively.

> ## Prerequisites {.prereq}
>
> This lesson guides you through the basics of file systems and the
> shell.  If you have stored files on a computer at all and recognize
> the word “file” and either “directory” or “folder” (two common words
> for the same thing), you're ready for this lesson.
>
> If you're already comfortable manipulating files and directories,
> searching for files with `grep` and `find`, and writing simple loops
> and scripts, you probably won't learn much from this lesson.

> ## Getting ready {.getready}
>
> You need to download some files to follow this lesson:
> 
> 1. Make a new folder in your Desktop called `shell-novice`.
> 2. Download [shell-novice-data.zip](./shell-novice-data.zip) and move the file to this folder.
> 3. If it's not unzipped yet, double-click on it to unzip it. You should end up with a new folder called `data`.
> 4. You can access this folder from the Unix shell with:
>
> ~~~ {.input}
> $ cd && cd Desktop/shell-novice/data
> ~~~

> ## Navigating this lesson {.getready}
>
> This lesson is organized as a series of topics listed below. To return back to this home page, 
> click "The Unix Shell" link at the top of each topic page. 
> 
> On each topic page, there are several different type of boxes that complement the lesson:
> 
> 1. Learning objectives for the topic are displayed at top of each page in a Yellow box.
> 2. Notes and clarifications are interspersed throughout the page in Blue boxes.
> 3. Challenge questions that extend the material presented in the topic can be found at the bottom of the page in Green boxes.

## Topics

1.  [Introducing the Shell](00-intro.html)
2.  [Files and Directories](01-filedir.html)
3.  [Creating Things](02-create.html)
4.  [Pipes and Filters](03-pipefilter.html)
5.  [Loops](04-loop.html)
6.  [Shell Scripts](05-script.html)
7.  [Finding Things](06-find.html)

## Other Resources

*   [Reference](reference.html)
*   [Discussion](discussion.html)
*   [Instructor's Guide](instructors.html)
